So let's dive right in,
what does responsive mean? What's a responsive app or a responsive layout? Responsiveness in
UI design and UI development is all about handling different sizes,
for example for your app, you of course might most commonly have portrait mode users or devices so that
users use your app on a phone, on a smartphone which is in portrait mode
but obviously users can also rotate that device and view your app in landscape mode and maybe you want
to adjust your app there a little bit to look better in landscape mode and be better usable there.
And in addition, people might not just use your app on phones but also on on bigger phones or on tablets
or on a desktop PC, wherever Android or iOS or whichever platform you're building for runs, you might
want to support that and don't show the same layout and all different device sizes and therefore in
this module, I'll introduce you to the general tools that enable you to build for these different device
sizes.
So that's responsive but what's adaptive? Adaptive is actually a term I came up with or you read it from
time to time but it's not an official term but it typically, if you read it, is related to adapting your
user interface to different operating systems your app runs on and that of course means you want to
have a certain look on Android and you want to have a certain probably different look and feel on iOS.
Still of course, we want to use one and the same project and one and the same codebase and therefore as
you will learn in this module, Flutter also gives you tools to adjust the look of your app or the behavior
of your app depending on the platform. For Android, you of course typically want that material design
look and the material design styles which you have in Flutter apps out of the box by the way,
so Android is the default operating system Flutter targets, probably because Flutter is developed by
a Google team.
You of course also want to have the typical Android animations when you're switching between different
screens for example,
now right now, we're not really switching between screens and we'll do that in a later course module
but nonetheless, that will also be a part of adapting your design and you might also want to use certain
Android specific fonts if you're not bringing your own fonts, as we are actually doing it.
And on iOS, unsurprisingly you want to have that iOS or Cupertino look in your app. Cupertino because
Apple sits in Cupertino and therefore this iOS look, the iOS design language is often also referred to
as Cupertino design, Cupertino styling.
You will obviously also want to have typical iOS animations when you're switching between pages and
by the way, it's not just about animations, it's also tiny details, for example on iOS apps, you can swipe
with your finger to go back and forth between different pages in your app. On Android,
that's typically not supported, you could bring either feeling, either user experience to the other platform,
you could add swiping to Android and you can get rid of it on iOS but typically you want to preserve
that default behavior
users of the platform are used to to make your app feel familiar to them.
And last but not least, of course you also might want to use specific fonts, the iOS fonts on the different
platforms and that would also be something we can refer to as adaptive.
So that is what responsive and adaptive means
and of course, our overall goal in Flutter is that we still only use one codebase, one project.
We don't want to start building totally different apps just for the different platforms because then,
we would be almost at the same point we are if we just use the native programming languages for the
platforms.
Obviously, you would still have the advantage of using only one programming language but if you have
to manage different projects, of course it means that whenever you add a certain new feature, even if
it doesn't directly impact the user interface, let's say you change the ordering logic for the transactions
users can add, then you have to do that in two different codebases, in two different projects
and that's typically something you would want to avoid.
So we absolutely want to stick in that one codebase and therefore, we also will have one widget tree
because Flutter is all about that widget tree
and if you remember the previous sections, then you had one widget at the top and then all the other
widgets are kind of nested inside of that widget by passing widgets into arguments of other widgets
and we want to keep that idea, we want to keep that structure and indeed in a Flutter app, you can only
have one root widget,
you can't have two entry points in your app for example. Now with all these restrictions or all these
goals, the only way for us to make our app responsive and/or adaptive is that we detect which platform
we're running on or which device size we have available in our code, in our widget tree
and then, we render certain sub-trees, certain individual widgets based on the platform or on the device
size we have
and therefore we have one widget tree
but in certain points of that tree, we have an either/or decision where we render differently styled
widgets or totally different widgets based on the size or on the platform
and that is what I will now show you throughout this module at different examples, where we will go back
to our application here and start working on it, so that we have a different look on iOS and also a
different behavior based on the device size.